4146 add troubleshooting section (#4181)
ClickHouse/clickhouse-docs: docs/tips-and-tricks/materialized-views.md

-- Challenge: Try this pattern with different low-cardinality column combinations
-- Experiment: Change the time granularity to see how it affects compression
SELECT 
    'Production Success Pattern' as analysis_type,
    count() as source_rows,
    uniq(event_type, toStartOfHour(created_at)) as unique_combinations,
    round(uniq(event_type, toStartOfHour(created_at)) / count() * 100, 4) as aggregation_ratio_percent,
    formatReadableSize(count() * 50) as estimated_source_size,
    formatReadableSize(uniq(event_type, toStartOfHour(created_at)) * 50) as estimated_mv_size,
    CASE 
        WHEN uniq(event_type, toStartOfHour(created_at)) / count() < 0.001 THEN 'OUTSTANDING: Like the 72GB→3GB compression example'
        WHEN uniq(event_type, toStartOfHour(created_at)) / count() < 0.01 THEN 'EXCELLENT: Massive aggregation benefit'
        WHEN uniq(event_type, toStartOfHour(created_at)) / count() < 0.1 THEN 'GOOD: Strong aggregation'
        ELSE 'REVIEW: Limited benefit'
    END as mv_assessment
FROM github.github_events
WHERE created_at >= '2024-01-01' 
  AND created_at < '2024-01-08'
LIMIT 1;
```

## When materialized views become a problem {#mv-problems}

> **Common mistake:** Teams create too many materialized views and hurt insert performance.

Author: Reworked this section to be a bit more useful instead of just a vague dramatic statement

slug: /tips-and-tricks/materialized-views
sidebar_label: 'Materialized Views'
doc_type: 'how-to-guide'
keywords: [
  'clickhouse materialized views',
  'materialized view optimization',
  'materialized view storage issues',
  'materialized view best practices',
  'database aggregation patterns',
  'materialized view anti-patterns',
  'storage explosion problems',
  'materialized view performance',
  'database view optimization',
  'aggregation strategy',
  'materialized view troubleshooting',
  'view storage overhead'
]
title: 'Lessons - Materialized Views'
description: 'Find solutions to the most common ClickHouse problems including slow queries, memory errors, connection issues, and configuration problems.'
---

# Materialized Views: The Double-Edged Sword {#materialized-views-the-double-edged-sword}
*This guide is part of a collection of findings gained from community meetups. For more real world solutions and insights you can [browse by specific problem](./community-wisdom.md).*
*Too many parts bogging your database down? Check out the [Too Many Parts](./too-many-parts.md) community insights guide.*
*Learn more about [Materialized Views](/materialized-views).*

> **Community warning from real production incidents:** Teams get *"over enthusiastic about materialized views and we end up creating too many of them and that kind of slows down... our injection as well"*

Reviewer: Here's a good example of where I feel like just writing a paragraph instead of having a quote is more effective: 

```suggestion
:::caution Community warning from real production incidents
Very often teams get over enthusiastic about materialized views, after all, they are one of ClickHouse's most useful features for incremental data transformation. Creating too many of them, however, can actually have an adverse effect.
:::
```

The meaning is clear and I don't have to try work out what is meant by "our injection as well". It probably made sense in the context of the video but without it it's not entirely clear to me what this person meant.

## The 10x Storage Anti-Pattern {#storage-antipattern}

> **Real production problem:** *"We had a materialized view... the raw log table was around 20 gig but the view from that log table got exploded to 190 gig so almost 10x the size of the raw table... this happened because... we were creating one row per attribute and each log can have 10 attributes"*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Real production problem:** *"We had a materialized view. The raw log table was around 20 gig but the view from that log table exploded to 190 gig, so almost 10x the size of the raw table. This happened because we were creating one row per attribute and each log can have 10 attributes."*
```

-- Experiment: Try different GROUP BY combinations to see aggregation ratios
SELECT 
    'MV Pre-deployment Health Check' as analysis_type,
    count() as source_rows,
    uniq(pickup_datetime, dropoff_datetime, passenger_count) as mv_unique_combinations,
    round(uniq(pickup_datetime, dropoff_datetime, passenger_count) / count() * 100, 2) as aggregation_ratio_percent,
    formatReadableSize(count() * 100) as estimated_source_size,
    formatReadableSize(uniq(pickup_datetime, dropoff_datetime, passenger_count) * 100) as estimated_mv_size,
    round(uniq(pickup_datetime, dropoff_datetime, passenger_count) * 100 / (count() * 100), 1) as storage_multiplier,
    CASE 
        WHEN uniq(pickup_datetime, dropoff_datetime, passenger_count) / count() > 0.95 THEN 'PROBLEM: MV will be larger than source!'
        WHEN uniq(pickup_datetime, dropoff_datetime, passenger_count) / count() > 0.7 THEN 'BAD: Massive storage waste (190GB scenario)'
        WHEN uniq(pickup_datetime, dropoff_datetime, passenger_count) / count() > 0.3 THEN 'QUESTIONABLE: High storage overhead'
        ELSE 'GOOD: Substantial aggregation benefit'
    END as mv_assessment

> FROM nyc_taxi.trips

Author: I'm actually removing these, too complex and not actionable to be helpful. More hey look at this cool analysis vs practical value.
